And
he helped me a lot in my work later on all these
conferences that we had. He
would work the hours that it took to get the job
done. He worked many, many hours. He was very
devoted. When you came, describe
the administration of the campus at that point.
Who were they and what were their
responsibilities? Well,
we had a dean of the College of Agriculture, of
Engineering. We had an arts and sciences dean. We
had medicine, vet medicine, and I, let's see, and
the business administration was still a section.
Who was there, who was the president then, when you
arrived? When I arrived, I,
there were two or three Well, let's turn it around.
The basic division was, and let's work it out,
basic division was headed by whom? Oh, it was
headed by John Arbitran. John Arbitran was an A&M
graduate, did his Ph.D. at Syracuse. No, not
Syracuse.
What is the...
Oh, it set my mind. But he had done his PhD at this
school.
Cliff Randstolt was the assistant dean of the
basic division. And I remember in numbers, The
student body was very close to what it was in 39. And
all freshmen were in the basic division? Yes.
Regardless of their major?
Yes. Bertrand reported to whom? He reported
directly to the president. To the president. and
you all were responsible for what? Tell me about
what the Basic Division did. Well, the Basic
Division was an organization of faculty members
that would be responsible for the academic
progress of the student through the sophomore
year, if necessary. The students would all be
under the same academic dean, which was Dean
Bertrand. We had a staff of about six or seven
counselors, and these counselors filled many
roles. They did all of the testing and placement
They worked with the day-to-day problems of the
students. We taught what was called basic
courses, which were guidance courses. Study
skills, vocational guidance,
things of this type. And this was available to the
veteran, too. I remember, and we had We had some
courses which were taught for the purpose of
trying to get the student like chemistry 100. This
would be a semester. English 100. Math 100. Now
this did not last too many years, but it was a
reality factor. And I saw students who had
forgotten their math and they would take math 100
and the first thing you know they were doing as well
as the others. It was not a goofball type thing.
Where were y'all physically located? We were in
the old Aggieland Inn. Cross from Sabeasa. Cross
from Sabeasa. And we had, we used two floors of that
thing. We,
there was a young couple who were there to, they
were there simply to keep an eye on the rest of the
Aggieland Inn because the MSC had had kind of taken
over that part of it. Now, it had once been a hotel,
small hotel, motel, life facility. When the MSC
opened, did it continue to have overnight gas? It
did overflow.
But we...
I think it was my second year that it was turned
completely over to us. Well, we thought we'd
blocked off the floors, but we later found the old
boy had been camping out up there. Now, the
staff that we had would
serve as strong supporters of youngsters who were
having difficulty of any type. We were given a lot
of latitude in which to work. If we felt that the
student was in a course that it was completely
impossible, we could no-grade drop it. Or we could
work with the department to work out some solution
to it. There was a lot of flexibility in the way that
it was carried out. Were there, in those years,
some assistant and associate deans in each of the
colleges with whom y'all had close working
relationships? They had similar
responsibilities? I don't think so. I think that
there were associate deans like Mickey McGuire
and, of course, Cliff over there later when the
thing worked a different way.
But you all were the primary academic counselors,
advisors on the campus. Yes. Share with this
machine and the future some anecdotes, some
stories that give examples of some of the variety
of experiences that you had. Well, you know, it was
sort of practical. I remember the first year that I
was, I had gone to the A&M adjunct in July and talked
out there for six weeks, and then I came back to the
campus.
I had this student come in one morning, and he was
very distraught, he was very upset. And he said, I
have slept through my quiz A in chemistry. And he
said, the whole thing is going to blow because I've
got to make it. And I said, well, why did you choose
to? He said, well, I work. And when I came in, I was so
tired that I forgot to set the alarm. So I did it.
Well, I wrote a note to the professor of chemistry
and said, I think this is a very fine young man, and I
think he's sincere, and I would appreciate it if we
could work something out. Well, the prof felt the
same way, but he's glad to get a fancy to They say,
well, I did because Curtis told me. Well, the
interesting thing is that that young man later
became a state chemist at Texas A&M University.
How nice. And he has retired now out from Blanco and
a very fine man. But it was...
But it was disappointing in a way though. My
personal opinion is that we were getting the
students that were in school during the war years
in the public school and they
probably lack of discipline. I mean, knowing and
staying with something. And we simply were
getting a number of those.
We also taught a course in vocational guidance.
And the purpose was to try to get the student into
the right field. Not necessarily the course, but
into the right field. And I sometimes wonder if
we're any better off now than we were then. That's a
tantalizing problem that I worked with for 30
years. And I think we've made progress. But it's a
shame, Pastor, for a young person to dump and spend
the money that it takes. And then you discover that
they really have no characteristics or strength
to be doing that. What about some memories of some
students that gave you a song and dance story that
made up something which you had reason to believe
might have been fabricated? One of the most
interesting things that happened was that at
the end of the semester, we always went through
this ritual of the students would be dropped. That
was one of the things that kind of broke our back, I
think, was that we didn't give much
understanding.
we would, Dr. Ransdell and I would take the
appeals.
Well this student came in to me and I always
prefaced a few comments by saying that We're here
to help you. It's not punishment, but it's what is
best for you and for the college. So now tell me in
your own language
why you feel that we should continue you. He said,
alright. He said, I can do that. He said, you know, I
have been down in the chapel all morning. And he
said, I prayed. And God has called me to stay here
and minister to the Aggies.
And I thought, uh-oh.
I I did a sneaky thing, I guess. I said, well, I
believe this is beyond me. I'm going to ask you to
wait outside and see Dr. Ransom.
And I would never let someone stay without
clearing the cliff because he was carrying a
burden. Well, you know, there was a saying that if
you can stay in Dr. Ransel's office 30 minutes, you
can stay in school. Oh, really? Oh, no, I hadn't
heard that. Yeah, well, that's what the kids...
Well, the Corps had some very implicit comments to
make about professors. Very meaningful
something that... and they share it with their
students. Well, I
don't know how it worked out later, but I will say a
follow up on this. I had a minister in graduate
class. And he and I were visiting during the break.
We had class from 5 to 8. I said, you know, I want to
tell you something, and I want to ask you what would
you have done? So I told him this story. And he said,
Mr. Curtis, I can help you. He said, I had something
happen one time that's a good example. He said,
it's a cold Sunday winter evening, and I had gone to
the chapel. to open it up for any of the GIs that
wanted to come. And he said, I opened it up, and I
went off to do something, came back, and there was
this soldier sitting down on the front row. So I
went over and said, soldier, can I help you? He
said, I don't know whether you can or not, but he
said, I've been called to preach here tonight. And
I said, boy, you're getting close. And he said,
well, I talked to him a little bit, and he said, the
boy insisted that this was the chapel that he had
been called. And the fellow said, well, he said,
now, soldier, he said, I believe that God has
called you to preach. And he may have called you to
preach in a chapel, but that would be between you
and God. But he said, if God had wanted you to preach
here tonight, he would have told me so I could have
made better preparation. He said, frankly, I
think you're in the wrong chapel. So
the GI sat there for a little while, he said, and got
up and left. He said, I don't know whether he found
the right chapel or
not.
It was a hard effort to try to show that we had
concern. Now, but we had helpers, so to speak, out
in the faculty because we not only would have this
help in a staff type thing, but each one of these
freshmen had an advisor in the area in which he was
hoping to major. This was a volunteer professor.
Right, and a freshman entered, was assigned to the
basic division, and to leave the basic division
had to have how many hours and what kind of grades?
He had to have 30 hours and 30 grade points. Okay,
and then could enter whatever major. Yes, yes. And
that program lasted until about when, the basic
division? It lasted through 59. 59. And on
September the 1st, 1960, then the academic
supervision went to the college concerned. And
then a counseling and testing center was
established. And I was made director of it. Now
who, as far as you know, who were the primary people
who... were responsible for those changes? I
think it came out of the concern. I don't think this
was an ugly thing at all. I think the concern was
that here we are in this college and we have little
or no control over the entering students and this
sort of thing. We believe that we could at least do
as well as the people that are doing it. They said,
we are not trying to take over the guidance
function. That's the last thing we want. And so
Dean Huber gumshoed this. He, for President
Rudder, he was the one that did the organizing, and
he
had a lot to do with it. But he established a
committee that was made up of, frankly, the
professors that would be handling this in
agriculture, all of these colleges. And we worked
all morning, once a week, all during the spring
semester of 59, getting ready for the transition.
All right. What were your first impressions of
this new president named Earl Runner? Well,
my impression was that here's a person who knows
where they're going. And they are going to be fair,
but they have high standards. Did you all have the
impression that he was sent here, he was selected
for some kind of particular function, reason,
purpose?
No, I don't think so. Because, frankly... he came
after we were going as a counseling center.
But our feeling was that he supported a counseling
center, but he had very high standards. And Frank
Hubert, your first impressions of him? Oh, well,
Dean Hubert has always impressed me as an
excellent leader. He's careful. I know because
all during those months in 59,
well, he would have me over one morning a week, and
my job was to give him complete orientation to a
counseling center and what all can be done. And
this was over in his office in Nagle Hall. Because
during that first year, I, as a beginning faculty
member,
being able to be here only because a faculty member
named John Hill was on leave at the University of
Houston, and I occupied his office, which was
right next door. And the only reason that I got a
nice office. Describe Hubert's other
characteristics, sense of humor and techniques
and so forth. Well, Dean Hubert, I remember we were
walking back from a meeting, Dean Hubert, Dr.
Ransom, and myself, and
Cliff wanted to talk to him. And... We were walking
along there and Dean Hubert said, now Cliff, what
is this arm twisting you want to do? What was he? And
I thought, boy, that's a pretty direct way of going
about this sort of thing. Well, I found also from,
he had, he was a man of high standards. And he told
you what he needed. And he never tried to tell you
how to do it. He just, this is what I need. Could he
get to the point rather quickly? Yes. Yes. As a
matter of fact, I think if he started something
like that, I knew to move on. But he was, now he is all
business. I think he's the type of person who says,
when you're working, you work. One of the little
things I've been trying to discover, if possible,
that I have not yet, is how Frank Hubert, then the
superintendent of schools in Orange, got
identified to come over here as dean of arts and
sciences. Do you have any idea... I think I have an
observation on that. It
is my understanding that President Rutter wanted
to get a dean. See, education was under him. I
wanted to get a dean that was well known in the
public schools of the state. See, we were trying to
break in on
this problem. In 1960,
Dean Hubert sort of ramrodded this. But I was the
one to turn the crank. we wanted to get something
out that we could send to the high schools that
would give them a reason to know us and know about
us. So I suggested that we develop a counselor's
handbook.
What would you want in a counselor's handbook if
you were a high school counselor to help. So Dean
Hubert approved it, said get with it. So we first
invited people in the state that were connected
with education and we wanted to know us. We had
people here from the Texas Education Agency. We
chose outstanding counselors of high schools
from different parts of the state. And we had about
20 people that came to the campus. We paid their
expenses. And we asked them to help us get the broad
outline of what should be in a counselor's
handbook. This was a good meeting. President
Rutter came to the meeting. I worked hard. I bought
some of the maroon briefcases over at the exchange
store, and the girls glued the seal on the outside
of it. So when they all came in that morning at every
table, There was a nice case for them to put their
things in. We also saw that they, everywhere they
went, they would take them. I mean, it was going to
meet us. We had some head honchos out of the Texas
Education Agency, and they were very helpful.
Well, for instance, this counselor down in
Galveston said, I never dreamed that you had these
kinds of facilities here.
So we published that counselor's handbook. It was
a real neat little handbook. And we found out later
that the University of Southern California was
the only other a university that was doing a
similar thing, and we exchanged counselors'
handbooks. Well, we put out about, and by the way,
the information service of the campus helped us
tremendously. There was a lady over in the
agriculture, Mrs. Holland, that helped a lot. As a
matter of fact, the second one that we put out, we
profited a lot from the first. You mean profited in
experience? Yes. Not dollars. No, no. As a matter
of fact, we... You gave them. Oh yes, these were
gifts that we sent to the school. The second one
went over well. Now, I would I would write each dean
of a college and say, what would you want to be seen
and read about your college in a counselor's
handbook? I remember that Dean Pearson.
Business. Business. Dean Pearson. I'll always
remember him as the man that would comment, we've
lost the fox. You know, we'd get to arguing and we'd
get off somewhere. Well, I sent to each associate
dean and said, read this over. Change it any way you
want to. But I want to be sure that you feel
comfortable about what was written. Business
just sent theirs back.
They sent it back with no changes. So we put it in
there. Well, when the thing was published, the
colleges all got copies, and the phone rang. And I
answered it, and Dean Pearson, boy, he was pretty
hot, I said. Dean Pearson, your office approved
what was written. I have it here in the file. He
said, is that right? I said, yes. He said, well,
I'll talk another way. He said that the next one of
these you publish, I... I want to be sure that we do
it right. I said, well, I sure am sorry it happened
too. Now, when I was ready to publish a third one,
this was about 1970, 71. I don't know, over in the
structure of the university somewhere, they
established this kind of information office or
something. And so I was told to refer my plan to
them. Well, I did, and I got back a note that said,
all of this is in the college catalog, and they
wouldn't do it.